Unit 22 - Spatio-temporal basic analysis
========================================

Map algebra
------------

Digital numbers (DN) need to be converted into Celsius scale
similarly as done in :ref:`Unit 24 <modis-dn-c>`. Instead of running
:grasscmd:`r.mapcalc` repeatedly there is a specialized temporal
command :grasscmd:`t.rast.mapcalc` which applies map algebra to all
the maps registered in input space time dataset.

.. tip::

   Many temporal data processing modules (``t.*``) support
   parallelization (see :param:`nproc` option).
   
.. code-block:: bash

   t.rast.mapcalc input=modis output=modis_c nproc=3 basename=modis_celsius \
   expression="if(modis != 0, modis * 0.02 - 273.15, null())"

.. note::

   Compared to expression used in :ref:`Unit 24 <modis-dn-c>`, raster
   map name is replaced by spatio-temporal dataset name.

   Alternatively :grasscmd:`t.rast.algebra` could be used to perform
   the DN transformation, see command below.

   .. code-block:: bash
                   
      t.rast.algebra basename=modis_celsius expression="modis_c = modis * 0.02 - 273.15"

Color table for all the maps in a spatio-temporal raster dataset can
be easily set by :grasscmd:`t.rast.colors` similarly as
:grasscmd:`r.colors` does for a single raster map.

.. code-block:: bash

   t.rast.colors input=modis_c color=celsius 

Data aggregation
----------------

The temporal framework enables the user to perform data aggregation in
a really simple way. The command to be used is
:grasscmd:`t.rast.aggregate`. Based on specified :param:`granularity`
a new temporal dataset with aggregated data is created.

.. code-block:: bash
                          
   t.rast.aggregate input=modis_c output=modis_cm basename=cm granularity="1 months" nproc=3

Statistics can be computed by :grasscmd:`t.rast.univar`.

.. code-block:: bash
                
   t.rast.univar modis_cm

::

   id|start|end|mean|min|max|...
   cm_2017_01@modis|2017-01-01 00:00:00|2017-02-01 00:00:00|-9.44159183015945|-24.37|5.09000000000003|...
   cm_2017_02@modis|2017-02-01 00:00:00|2017-03-01 00:00:00|-9.53477082170954|-21.0066666666666|5.41000000000003|...

Another aggregation method is based on :grasscmd:`t.rast.series`, it
allows to aggregate spatio-temporal raster dataset or part of it by
various methods. The module returns a single raster map as output and
not a temporal dataset as by :grasscmd:`t.rast.aggregate`. In example
below annual average temperature is computed.

.. code-block:: bash
                
   t.rast.series input=modis_c output=modis_avg method=average

Univariate statistics of created raster map with average temperature
values can be calculated by :grasscmd:`r.univar`.
   
.. code-block:: bash

   r.univar modis_avg

::

   minimum: -10.8297
   maximum: 15.9633
   range: 26.7931
   mean: -0.876881

.. figure:: ../images/units/22/annual_avg.png

   Average temperature in Norway for 2017.

Data visualization
------------------

In addition to :grasscmd:`g.gui.timeline` introduced in :ref:`Unit 21
<g-gui-timeline>` there are other two GRASS tools for temporal data
visualization: :grasscmd:`g.gui.animation` (:menuselection:`Temporal
--> GUI tools --> Animation tool`) and :grasscmd:`g.gui.tplot`
(:menuselection:`Temporal --> GUI tools --> Temporal plot tool`).

Tool :grasscmd:`g.gui.animation` allows creating animations in
different formats, the example below showing the monthly average
values.

.. code-block:: bash

   g.gui.animation strds=modis_cm

.. figure:: ../images/units/22/modis_animation.gif
   :class: middle
           
   Monthly average dataset animation with celsius color table applied.

The second tool, :grasscmd:`g.gui.tplot`, allows plotting the time
series of defined variable of interest for a specific point or area of
a study region. In example below coordinates of Studenterhytta venue
are used.

.. code-block:: bash

   g.gui.tplot strds=modis_c coordinates=258121.68627886,6662114.92897065
   
.. figure:: ../images/units/22/tplot_modis.png
   :class: middle

   The plot of MODIS monthly average temperature @ Studenterhytta
